MINORITY WOMEN IN SCIENCE 

Minority women represent a disturbingly small part of the total
scientific manpower pool,* but are a significant component whose needs seem
not to have been addressed by existing programs for minorities or women. They
have traditionally been excluded because of biases related to both their race
or ethnicity and gender, constituting a double bind. Programs for minorities
and women have generally been assumed to include minority women, but in fact
minority women fall in the cracks between the two. The programs designed to
increase the number of women in science have been largely devoted to assisting
majority women. The programs developed for minorities in science have mostly
been dominated by male scientists. Similarly, the women's science
organizations are overwhelmingly white, and the minority science
organizations, overwhelmingly male.

When it became apparent that minority women were not participating
fully in either kind of program, it was decided to organize a meeting of
minority women scientists, to seek their analysis of their situation and
recommendations for programs to increase their numbers and improve their
status in science. Minority women scientists had never before met together
and they greeted announcement of the conference with great enthusiasm.
Jewel Plummer Cobb, member of the National Science Board and advisor to the
American Association for the Advancement of Science, chaired the two day
meeting in December 1975. The conference was organized by the AAAS Office
of Opportunities in Science and supported by the National Science Foundation. 
This monograph summarizes the findings and recommendations of the
conference.

The thirty conferees were drawn from a lamer pool of almost two
hundred minority women scientists nominated by their colleagues.** These
Black, Mexican-American, Native American and Puerto Rican women represented
various fields of science, engineering and medicine, as well as a variety of
educational and work experiences, geographical areas and generations.
Distinguished in their respective fields, they had overcome many obstacles
in their attempts to obtain education and employment in science. Despite the
fact that they personally had been able to surmount monumental barriers, the
conferees expressed concern for the hundreds of thousands of minority 
group members, especially minority women, who have been excluded or
systematically "tracked" out of the pool of potential scientific and
technological humanpower.

The price of becoming a scientist, engineer or biomedical professional
is very high. The financial and personnel resources of the nation that are
involved in the production of scientists, engineers, and biomedical
professionals bespeak this investment. The costs to the individuals who aspire
to these fields are extremely high in terms of the economic resources, human
energy and personal commitment and endurance which are required. Any scientist
can probably remember instances where he or she had to decide between a few
extra hours in the lab or a few more hours of sleep or maybe a movie. The
pursuit of careers in science, engineering and biomedicine is not easily fit
into the confines of a nine-to-five day or five day week.

The price of being a scientist, engineer or biomedical professional is
also high. Numerous studies point out the personal sacrifices that scientists
make and the kind of life that is assumed to go with the profession. Babies
that do not wait to be born, computers that "crash" at 3 A.M., site visits
that require extended periods of time away from family are not unheard of for
many of these professionals. The additional costs to the family of scientists
often go unrecognized.* All is not cost, however. Much is benefit, as any
scientist would be quick to point out, but personal fulfillment does not erase
what must be traded off.

The already high price of a professional science career is raised
significantly by any additional obstacle, e.g., physical disability, poverty
or prejudice of any kind. Because of the history of racial discrimination in
the United States, a history which does not exclude the scientific community,
the price of a career in science is very high for members of minority groups.
The attitudinal, financial, and cultural barriers to full participation in
science by Black, Mexican-American, Native American and Puerto Rican citizens
have not been removed, and this is reflected by the small number of members of
these racial and ethnic groups in the scientific workforce.

The traditional male domination of the science fields has made the
attainment of and participation in science careers for women difficult at best.
The price of a professional science career is therefore significantly higher
for a woman. The demands on women to assume family-related responsibilities are
not thought to be compatible with study for or work in these traditionally male
professions. The mode of academic preparation and work-style have been
developed around traditional majority male lifestyles which differ
substantially from the varied life patterns of women. Role stereotyping and sex
discrimination add to the personal costs of women who seek to fulfill career
goals as scientists, engineers. or biomedical professionals.

There seems therefore to be a range of costs to the individual in the
attainment of a professional science career. The more an individual resembles
the "typical scientist" the lower are his costs. Each factor of deviation from 
the norm raises the costs so that, as a group, minority women must pay a
tremendous price for a career in science. This "differentness" of the minority
woman in science may not only be a factor in the scientific community but also
in the context of her culture. The tremendous personal cost that results from
the combined effect of being a scientist, a woman and a member of a minority
racial or ethnic group was frequently alluded to in the conference discussions.
The toll of foregone social and personal activity, highly valued in traditionally 
defined cultural roles, was for many severe. The scarcity of companions of their 
own racial or ethnic group and gender, progressively greater
as the degree of specialization in science increased, was a source of isolation
and loneliness. Majority males and, to a lesser degree, females are not
required to bear this burden. The feeling of differentness, which for most of
the conferees, began to develop as early as their interest in science, was
reinforced continually by the recurrent experience of being the only member of
their own, or any, minority group, and/or the only woman in so many situations. 

Most of the conferees would probably not describe themselves as
feminists although they are all actively concerned about the issues which
are labelled the issues of the women's movement. This seeming contradiction 
in terms is more than semantic, however. Most of these women
scientists ally themselves primarily with the elimination of the racism
faced by all members of their racial or ethnic group. The problems faced
by all women are clearly important to these women also, but for most seem
usually to command second priority.

The reasons for this choice are several and not easily
understood. For many minority women the women's movement is seen as a
movement of middle and upper class white women which does not specifically
address itself to the concerns and issues faced by minority women. Some
also see the bias which most acutely affects the progress of their people
as that of racism which strikes early in the lives of minority group
members to limit their potential advancement. From this perspective, it
becomes necessary to deal with first things first.

All of the conferees had encountered sexism in one form or another
and recognized it as such. They had all experienced instances where they
were treated differently from male professionals, even minority males.
They had encountered sexism from minority males as well and recognized it
as such. 

The minority women scientists attending the conference, along with
many others who communicated their experience to the conference organizers,*
perceived that their earlier experiences with racism were superseded by
problems of sexism as they progressed through graduate and professional
education and the working world. It must be noted that several instances
were recalled which could have been brought about by race or gender bias or
both. When this situation arises it becomes difficult if not impossible to
determine which "ism" is in force. In such a case, it does not matter
whether one is being hit with the club of sexism or racism--they both hurt.
And this is the nature and the essence of the double bind. 

The minority woman scientist is caught in the middle of a difficult
situation. She is often being pulled from both sides by women's groups and
minority organizations. If she affilitates with both, they can place a
tremendous demand on her time. However, she is all too often asked to align
herself with one or the other group. In neither instance is she treated as
a whole person with some of the same problems as her women and minority
male counterparts, as well as some unique ones.

Minority males and majority females must come to realize that a
demand for the minority woman to make a choice places her in an untenable
position since she can deny neither the fact of her race or ethnic identity
nor her gender. Nor can she avoid the problems associated with both. 